[SOUND]
In this video,
we're giving our enemies some bullets and
having them shoot.
We've got lots of tunability here.
We've got some randomness and
a lot of levers for
you to pull when you're doing
your design tuning of the game.
So let's jump in and
have our enemies do some shooting.
In this video, we're working in the the
Enemy script and the Player script.
So let's just recap what we're
trying to do with our enemy.
A little bit different to the player,
cuz the player is shooting on a coroutine
based upon whether the input is on
the button down or not on the button down.
But we don't need the button-down stuff
for the enemy, cuz the enemy is our AI,
and it knows whether it's shooting or not.
So this is an enemy.
It kinda looks like a box, but
let's pretend it's an enemy.
There you go, it's an enemy with ears.
[LAUGH] Best enemy ever.
And a rocket booster.
So when the enemy shoots,
it's gonna shoot a laser beam.
And this laser beam, we want to
have it shoot at a certain time.
So if we don't give it
a mechanism of time,
it's just gonna be this constant
stream of shooting the whole time.
So what we wanna say is shoot
every x amount of time.
So every one second, for example.
So then it's gonna go pew, and then
wait a second, pew, wait a second, pew,
wait a second.
I also think we should
put in some randomness.
Cuz when you get an enemy
that's going pew, pew, pew,
it's very predictable and
very, again, not organic.
It doesn't feel like the enemy is
actually thinking about what it's doing.
Now, just a slight caveat, you might
wanna have an enemy that comes onto
the screen and
it has a very predictable pattern, so
the player has to do some
kind of dodging or weaving.
So predictability is okay, but
I wanna have some randomness.
So it might be every second, all right,
plus or minus half a second, for example,
that we want our enemy to be shooting.
So we need a mechanism of
having a shot counter.
And if it's 1 second, then as soon
as we shoot the previous bullet,
or as soon as we start our shot counter,
we want that to be ticking down to,
0.99, 0.98, 0.97, and so
on until we get down to 0.
And then when we get down to 0 it says,
fire!
And then it restarts the shot counter.
And it might be, if we've got this
randomness in here, it might start at 1,
or it might start at 1.2, for example,
and then it ticks its way down,
and when it gets to 0, it fires.
Okay, so that's generally
the approach we're taking.
So we'll start by creating
our shot counter.
So [SerializeField] float, and
I'll call this shotCounter.
And this is serialized just so we can see
it in the Inspector if we need to look
at it from a debug point of view, but
not so that we're changing it ourselves.
Now, two more variables,
[SerializeField] float,
this will be our minTimeBetweenShots, and
we'll initialize that at, say, 0.2f;.
And then we will [SerializeField],
create a float that we'll
call maxTimeBetweenShots.
We'll initialize that at, say, 3f.
Okay, so within our stop method, let's,
start our shop counter, when we start our
script, in other words when, start is cold
that means our enemy has been insatiated.
We want to initialize our shot counter or
start it.
So shotCounter = Random.Range.
And the Random.Range is going
to be between two values.
And those two values, you guessed it,
are minTimeBetweenShots,
maxTimeBetweenShots.
Okey-dokey, now, in our update,
we need to be saying, okay,
shoot and
then start your shot counter again.
Or wait until you're able to shoot again,
and then after we've shot,
we need to restart our
shot counter once again.
So in our update, let's call a method,
we'll call this CountDownAndShoot,
that we haven't created yet,
but we'll create in a moment.
Parentheses and semicolon.
I'll create this just right
underneath our Update method,
private void CountDownAndShoot().
Open our code block.
Now, what shall we say within here?
We need a way of decreasing
our shot counter.
So shotCounter -= Time.deltaTime.
So we have this frame rate
independent using Time.deltaTime.
So it's saying every frame,
cuz we're calling this method every frame,
CountDownAndShoot, every frame our shot
counter needs to be going down for
however long our frame takes in time.
So that's shotCounter minus the time
that our frame takes every single frame.
And then once the shotCounter gets to 0,
that's when we shoot.
So we'll say if (shotCounter <= 0f),
so float, then what do we wanna do here?
Well, in this case, we want to say, fire!
Fire(), and then semicolon.
What is Fire?
Well, we haven't created that yet.
But that is where we are going to
instantiate our projectile and
to give it some downwards velocity.
And I'm gonna save and
jump over to my slide,
cuz this is where I have a challenge for
you, which is to make the enemy shoot.
So as we did with the player shooting,
so there's the big hint for you,
is to go into the Player script and
have a look at what we did in there.
Or, if you think you can figure this out
without going and having a look at that,
that's cool as well.
What you need to do is
instantiate a projectile and
to give it velocity to make it move.
Remember, we also need to serialize
a variable that will be the projectile, so
that in the Inspector we can say the enemy
is going to shoot this particular
projectile.
And we also need to create
a projectile for the enemy to shoot.
So there's a few things to do in there.
But if you just wanna
do the starting point,
it's to instantiate the projectile and
give it some velocity to move downwards.
So take that on, and
I'll see you back here in a moment.
Okay, so we have our Fire method.
I'm going to create a private,
don't know what happened there.
Going to create a private
void Fire method, open and
close parentheses, and then curly braces.
In here we need to start by
having some way of saying,
this is what the projectile is.
So, we'll create a GameObject that
I will call, we'll call it laser.
It might not always be a laser,
but I'll just call it that now,
cuz that's a generic kinda enemy word for
what it's gonna be shooting.
And that = Instantiate.
We know this is gonna be reasonably long,
so I'll put this on the next line.
Instantiate (projectile).
And we need some sort of mechanism
to say what projectile is, so
I'll go up to the top of my script,
[SerializeField].
[SerializeField], this will be
a GameObject that we will call projectile.
Oops, okay.
GameObject of projectile.
So let's back down to our
Instantiate (projectile,
comma, what comes next in this sequence?
Well it's the position that we
want it to instantiate at, so
that's transform.position.
So create yourself where the enemy is,
and then Quaternion.identity,
which is just our way of saying we
don't need to worry about rotation.
The rotation is just
the rotation of the parent.
And we close our parentheses.
And then we say as GameObject
to be very clear that
we're instantiating our
GameObject as a GameObject.
And on the next line, again,
I haven't showed you the Player script but
I'm sure you found it
if you went looking for
this while we we're doing
our Fire continuously.
We've got the same information here
where we have our laser.GetComponent.
So I might just copy this from over
here on our Player script, copy that,
head over into the Enemy script, paste
that out and make sure it all looks okay.
laser.GetComponent<Rigidbody2D> yes,
.velocity, that looks good.
= new Vector 2(0, projectileSpeed).
Okay, we don't have a projectileSpeed yet,
so again, [SerializeField],
and this'll be a float, and
we'll call it projectileSpeed.
And we'll start that off at,
let's say 10f, just as a guess.
So we have our projectileSpeed.
Back down to our Fire.
Okay, so there's one problem with this.
You can see that in the Player,
we have a positive projectileSpeed,
which has the enemy shooting
upwards on the y axis.
Whereas our Enemy,
we need to be shooting downwards, cuz
they're coming from the top and shooting
down, so we'll say -projectileSpeed.
We'll save all this up, jump back
over into Unity, find a projectile.
Do we have one yet for our enemy?
Probably not.
Click on Prefabs.
We've got the Player Laser.
I'm gonna create a different one.
I'm not gonna use the Player Laser,
cuz we're
gonna have different sort of damage and
different values on the Player Laser.
So over into our assets,
we'll see what we've got.
PNG, Lasers, okay,
we've got a few in here.
[SOUND] Okay,
this red laser beam looks like it's okay.
I'm gonna drop that into
my Sprites folder, so
it's very clear I am using it for
my Sprites folder.
Drop it into my scene,
that looks just fine.
It might be a little bit too dark, but
that'll add to the danger of the whole
situation with these red laser beams.
We might need to brighten it up a little
bit, but for now we'll leave it as is.
Instead of LaserRed3,
I’ll call this Enemy Laser, and
then drag that into my Prefabs
folder to create an enemy laser.
Super-duper.
What’s on the Player Laser?
Well, we’ve got a Damage Dealer script,
we need to have that on an enemy as well.
Enemy Laser for the future,
Damage Dealer, great.
The Damage Dealer is looking for
a certain amount of damage.
Cool, we'll leave that as is for now and
then jump over onto our enemy prefab,
To Roger on here.
We need to tell him what
the projectile is going to be.
So in our Inspector,
I've found my Enemy script.
And there's a field, Projectile,
that currently has no GameObject.
I've hit my selector, and
then select on Enemy Laser.
Projectile speed 10, good.
The shot counter is 0.
So we've exposed that in the Inspector.
We probably don't need to see that, but
we can look at it from the point of
view of debugging what's going on.
And we can hide that once we've
got that all taken care of.
And this looks pretty good.
Let's see if it actually shoots.
I'm going to delete my laser
that I dropped into the scene.
Click on play, all going to plan.
We should have some shooting, whoops.
Okay, so they're shooting, but
not in a way that makes any sense at all.
So they're just leaving it
as a trail behind them.
Let's jump back into our script
to see what we're doing here,
make sure we're actually
giving it some velocity.
Laser, yes, and of course the clue
is right here in this line.
When we have a look at this, what is the
one thing in here that we haven't talked
about when it comes to our laser?
We haven't talked about actually
giving it a Rigidbody 2D.
So that's cool.
Let's click on our Enemy Laser prefab,
Add Component, Rigidbody 2D.
Now it should be cool.
It has a Rigidbody 2D, so it knows how
to push itself along with some velocity.
It's currently on body type Dynamic, so
I'm going to change that to Kinematic,
not leave it on Dynamic,
as I did for my Player Laser.
At some point, here we go.
Move around, okay.
[LAUGH] That's doing a whole
lot of shooting, pretty nasty.
And that is because we have
not reset our shotCounter.
We haven't said the,
let's see up here, shotCounter,
we're setting at Random.Range and
saying how long it should take.
I'm gonna copy that.
And then after we Fire, we need to add
this line to reset the shotCounter,
and to give it a new Random.Range
between our minimum and our maximum.
We'll save this up again,
jump back over into Unity.
This is often the process we go through.
Add a little bit,
chip away at it, figure out what's wrong,
figure out what's working.
Now our enemies should be shooting in
a little bit more of a friendly way.
Okay, shoot-shoot, pew-pew.
Okay, there's some good
lasers coming down.
It looks like there's
definitely randomness in them.
And we'll see if one enemy,
we'll have a look at our guy just here.
It looks like he's
shooting quite regularly.
Yeah, so shooting over and over.
We'll make sure when we shoot the enemies
that the right sort of behavior happens.
Okay, looking pretty good.
So next up, we need to give our player
some health and a way for the enemy and
the enemy's bullets to decrease
the health of the player.
Great work, and
see you in the next lecture.